# Testing read aloud apps


Why does a manager need to understand organizational culture and employee diversity?
If you get the culture right, most of the other stuff will just take care of itself
—Tony Hsieh, CEO of Zappos.com
Imagine for a moment that you have just been promoted to CEO of Zappos.com, a major online shoe and clothing shop. Where should you immediately focus your attention? Finance? Marketing? Maybe improving supply chain operations? Although all of these areas are important, Tony Hsieh, the current CEO of Zappos.com, believes that defining and maintaining the organizational culture is key. In fact, as you read in the earlier quote, he believes that the right culture will enable the other functional areas of business to succeed.
Why is culture so important? Think for a moment about teams that you have been a part of in the past. These could be teams at work, school, or even sports. Also think about how you felt as a member of the team. Now consider two questions: Did you share the same goals, desires, and values as the other members of the team? Did you feel like an important part of the team, and were you committed to its success?
There is a high probability that you had the same answer to both questions, whether yes or no. For example, if you shared the same values as others on the team, then you likely were highly committed to the group’s goals.
This is the strategic advantage of having a culture that resonates throughout the entire organization. It leads to a highly motivated team that is success-focused. It’s so important that Zappos.com lists on its corporate web page the Zappos 10 Core Values. It includes the following:
Deliver WOW Through Service
Embrace and Drive Change
Create Fun and A Little Weirdness
Be Adventurous, Creative, and Open-Minded
Pursue Growth and Learning
Build Open and Honest Relationships With Communication
Build a Positive Team and Family Spirit
Do More With Less
Be Passionate and Determined
Be Humble
By clearly defining its culture, Zappos.com is able to recruit the right people and have them focus on the right things. As you work through this module, you will gain a better understanding of the importance of an organization’s culture as a competitive advantage. Additionally, you will understand how to maintain culture over time or how implement cultural change if needed. Finally, you will come to see both the opportunities and challenges faced by promoting diversity within the culture.
Organizational culture is a term that describes the shared values and goals of an organization. When everyone in a corporation shares the same values and goals, it’s possible to create a culture of mutual respect, collaboration, and support. Companies that have a strong, supportive culture are more likely to attract highly qualified, loyal employees who understand and work toward the company’s best interests.
Organizational culture is a term that can relate to any organization at all, from a church to a university. When talking about the culture of a business, you’ll often hear the term “corporate culture.” Corporate culture is, according to INC Magazine:
the shared values, attitudes, standards, and beliefs that characterize members of an organization and define its nature. Corporate culture is rooted in an organization’s goals, strategies, structure, and approaches to labor, customers, investors, and the greater community. As such, it is an essential component in any business’s ultimate success or failure.[1]
Like families (or nations), corporations have cultures. Sometimes those cultures “just happen.” All too often, when corporate culture is not intentionally created, the culture winds up being disjointed or even antagonistic. Employees are all working toward different goals, in different ways, with different approaches. For instance, although Bob is dedicated to the idea of crafting quality products, Suzanne is eager to sell as much product as possible (even if the quality is only so-so). Meanwhile, Brad thinks the company should start making a wider range of products and is trying to push his ideas forward during sales meetings.
The idea of corporate culture developed from our knowledge of national, regional, and family cultures, and many theories exist about what makes a good (or poor) corporate culture. To get an idea of what a corporate culture looks like, think about families you know well. Some are formal whereas others are easygoing. Some work together toward shared goals whereas others encourage individuality and independence. Some are always having fun whereas others seem to be in a permanent state of internal conflict. We can describe corporate cultures in similar ways.
Although some businesses give little thought to corporate culture, many successful companies have cultures that are intentionally created or tweaked. Sometimes corporate cultures are the result of a founder’s personal vision. But just as often, corporate cultures are created through a collaborative effort that involves not only upper management but also managers and employees.
What Do Corporate Cultures Look Like?
Perhaps the best way to get an idea of what we’re talking about when we talk about corporate culture is to consider some examples. Let’s take a look at the cultures inside a few well-known companies.
IBM
IBM’s founder Thomas Watson was one of the great developers of corporate culture. Based on a very different worldview than the one we have today, it encouraged morality, temperance, and consistency. Men who worked for IBM were expected to dress in a certain style (dark suits, white shirts) and behave conservatively. The “IBM Spirit” was even represented in corporate songs such as “Ever Onward” that employees were required to sing at gatherings and conventions.
The lyrics to “Ever Onward,” captured in a songbook from 1937, are a great way to understand the original culture of a company that became one of the truly great icons of American business. Read one verse of the song that follows.
EVER ONWARD – EVER ONWARD!
That’s the spirit that has brought us fame!
We’re big, but bigger we will be
We can’t fail for all can see
That to serve humanity has been our aim!
Our products now are known, in every zone,
Our reputation sparkles like a gem!
We’ve fought our way through – and new
Fields we’re sure to conquer too
For the EVER ONWARD I.B.M.[2]
Google
One business that has revolutionized the way of work and its vision about it is Google. Google has become known as the company with endless perks for its valued employees. Some of these include coffee bars, free meals, lounge breaks, and even the option to bring your pet to work! Google has locations worldwide, and management embraces the idea that a happy employee leads to a productive workplace. The company’s long-term success ties back to its corporate culture and values. Here’s a list of Google’s core values, around which it builds its corporate culture:
We want to work with great people.
Technology innovation is our lifeblood.
Working at Google is fun.
Be actively involved; you are Google.
Don’t take success for granted.
Do the right thing; don’t be evil.
Earn customer and user loyalty and respect every day.
Sustainable long-term growth and profitability are key to our success.
Google cares about and supports the communities where we work and live.
Apple
Google likes to make sure its employees are having fun, but Apple’s corporate culture is a bit more focused on getting things done. Its founder, Steve Jobs, passed along a set of core values that make it clear that competition, focus, and hard work are part of the organizational culture:
We believe that we’re on the face of the Earth to make great products.
We believe in the simple, not the complex.
We believe that we need to own and control the primary technologies behind the products we make.
We participate only in markets where we can make a significant contribution.
We believe in saying no to thousands of projects so that we can really focus on the few that are truly important and meaningful to us..
We believe in deep collaboration and cross-pollination of our groups, which allow us to innovate in a way that others cannot.
We don’t settle for anything less than excellence in every group in the company, and we have the self-honesty to admit when we’re wrong and the courage to change.[3]
Compare Apple’s values to those of Google. Apple focuses on competition, outcomes, and excellence, whereas Google emphasizes values such as having fun, behaving ethically, serving the customer, and engaging with the wider world. Both companies make digital products, both have seen great success, and both attract plenty of dedicated employees. But because the corporate cultures are so different, Apple and Google attract different people who have different personal goals, work styles, and expectations.
Corporate Culture as a Competitive Advantage
Why is it so important to have a strong, positive corporate culture? There are three good reasons:
A strong culture helps employees, customers, and the general public to identify your corporate values. Say, for example, that your company culture values innovation. In that case, your employees will know that they will be encouraged to come up with new ideas—and your customers will know that your products and services are likely to have a creative or unique quality.
Companies with strong, coherent cultures attract high-quality employees who believe in the same values as the corporation. Once those employees come on board, they start to feel that they “belong” because they are part of a shared culture. Employees who feel that their jobs are a great match for their personal values are more likely to be loyal to their employers. After all, they are doing what they enjoy doing for an organization that shares their ideals and goals.
A strong corporate culture can help a corporation to build its brand. For example, Starbucks has built a culture and brand that includes very public dedication to international fair trade. Customers who care about fair trade are more likely to buy from—and stay loyal to—Starbucks.
E.H. Schein is a theorist who studies corporate culture. In 1992, he wrote a book titled Organizational Culture and Leadership, which suggests that there are three levels of corporate culture. At the core of a culture are basic assumptions about human behavior, which are usually so ingrained into the culture that they’re difficult to pinpoint. Surrounding the assumptions are expressed values drawn from those assumptions. These usually appear in the form of standards, rules, and public expressions of the organization’s philosophy. At the surface level are artifacts that are the outcome of the assumptions and values—these appear as actions, policies, the physical environment, office jokes, and so on.
For example, when Home Depot, under the leadership of a new CEO, needed to return the company to its customer-centric roots in 2007, it quickly introduced artifacts—buttons and awards—to remind everyone who came first: customers. Sales associates began wearing buttons that invited customers to ask for help. Associates were rewarded for outstanding customer reviews and recognized in meetings with sales plaques and more buttons. With a renewed focus on its stated value of providing excellent customer service, Home Depot began hiring people who loved serving customers instead of worrying about costs and profits. Management did not completely abandon the cost discipline of its previous CEO, but it loosened the reins substantially. The underlying assumption was that profits would return if the company took care of customers. Profits did return, although the competition from Lowe’s has been stiff.
There is no right or wrong set of assumptions and values, and companies can be successful no matter which values they embrace. You are, however, most likely to do well with a company that shares your beliefs. Just looking around a workplace can help you to determine whether a company values hierarchy or shared authority, individual achievement or teamwork.
Every corporation has its own organizational culture. It turns out, though, that the vast majority of corporations fall into just seven cultural categories. When employees’ personal styles, values, and assumptions match those of their employers, there’s a good chance that the outcome will be positive. When they don’t match, problems can ensue.

Understanding a set of values that might be used to describe an organization’s culture helps us identify, measure, and manage that culture more effectively. One framework that provides insight into the different types of organizational culture is the seven-dimension Organizational Culture Profile (OCP). The OCP is an instrument initially developed by consultants Charles A. O’Reilly III, Jennifer Chatman, and David F. Caldwell to assess person-organization fit. In theory, employees should have the same basic cultural assumptions and values as the company for which they work.
According to the OCP, every corporation can be described as one of the following:
Detail-oriented
Not surprisingly, detail-oriented companies are all about meticulous attention to details. These companies tend to be in customer-oriented industries in which such precision is valued. For example, Four Seasons hotels are dedicated to providing customers with exactly the service they prefer, and they keep records on each guest’s experiences, preferences, and expectations. Employees working for Four Seasons must have an eye for detail and thrive on keeping meticulous records.
Innovative
Individuals who want opportunities to invent new products or services should consider working for companies such as W.L. Gore and Associates, maker of GORE-TEX, or 3M. These companies not only encourage innovation but give employees company time to work on their own projects. This approach can result in a wide range of exciting new products developed by engineers or scientists working on their own.
Aggressive
Although some companies value cooperation, others value aggressive competition. Stratasys, a maker of 3D printers, has been willing to make enemies in order to survive and thrive. Stratasys expanded rapidly through growth, takeovers, and mergers to gain a dominant position in the 3D printer industry. Sometimes, Stratasys’ aggressive approach has gotten the company into legal battles—but the company has continued to perform well.
Outcome-oriented
Outcome-oriented businesses are all about results. At RE/MAX, for example, employees are trained to sell products, and they are evaluated on their sales performance. RE/MAX, short for “Real Estate Maximums,” is an American international real estate company that operates through a franchise system. The company has held the number-one market share in the United States and Canada since 1999.
Stable
Employees at a stable corporation know exactly who is in charge, who to report to, and what they are expected to accomplish. Kraft Foods, for example, is a very stable organization with a strong bureaucracy. Although it is consistent, however, Kraft is not known for innovation or creativity.
People-oriented
If you work for a people-oriented corporation, you can expect the company to care about you. They value fairness and are supportive of individuals’ rights and dignity. Software company SAS is a good example of a people-oriented company that offers employees a wide range of individualized benefits, including on-site childcare. CEO Jim Goodnight’s philosophy is, “Treat employees like they make a difference, and they will.” The result: a loyal and dedicated workforce.
Team-oriented
Employees who like to collaborate and cooperate with team members do well in team-oriented companies. Whole Foods, for example, expects its employees to function as members of teams—and to support other members of the team when necessary. This creates strong, solid relationships within working groups.
There is no one “best” type of corporate culture, and many larger corporations actually exhibit more than one culture. For example, the sales department may have an aggressive culture, whereas marketing is more team-oriented. In general, however, corporations can be grouped into the categories mentioned earlier.
Where does organizational culture come from? How is it maintained? How can you recognize it when you see it? In this section, we’ll investigate the sources of culture in an organization, as well as the methods for maintaining it. And we’ll talk about how to spot the signs of an organization’s culture even when you’re an outsider looking in.

No matter where you work, you will experience organizational culture. Employees can usually tell from the get-go if their place of employment is serious or fun, people-oriented or results-oriented. But how did the culture get started? How do employees get to know about the corporate culture and help to keep it in place?
Sources of Culture in an Organization
Founders
When a company is founded, there is usually a single individual or group of individuals involved. The founder or founders have a vision for their new company—and that vision helps to form the corporate culture. In some cases, the founder is very intentional about creating a particular culture; he or she may actually want to create a business in which, for example, innovation or teamwork is valued. in other cases, the founder’s personality unintentionally forms the culture.
Some individual founders have such strong personalities and values that the company continues to reflect their goals even as it grows—and even after the founder dies. Walt Disney, for example, modeled leadership, teamwork, and innovation so that, even today, the Disney Corporation is built around the values and assumptions of its founder.
Another good example of the way that founders’ values create corporate culture is Ben and Jerry’s Ice Cream. Founders Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield started out to create a company with strong social values—and they succeeded. The company started in 1978, but even today the company continues to focus on sustainability, environmental activism, social activism, and charity.
Industry
It’s one thing to be creative, innovative, and fun in the hospitality or entertainment business. But that type of culture won’t work well in an industry that’s built around regulations and policies that cannot be changed or bent. Industries such as pharmaceuticals and nuclear power require attention to detail and cannot tolerate a “creative” approach to following rules. True, a pharmaceutical company can be people-oriented to a degree, but its willingness to support the individual needs of employees must be secondary to its absolute compliance with regulations and the law.
Methods for Maintaining Corporate Culture
Why do some companies maintain their culture whereas others see it fall apart? The answer lies in how the company goes about recruiting, hiring, onboarding, and training its employees.
Recruiting. To find employees who will fit into the corporate culture, recruiters must look in the right places. When looking for upper-level managers, recruiters should look at corporations with a similar culture to their own. When looking for entry-level employees, recruiters should tap college programs or websites that reflect their corporate culture.
Hiring. When interviewing job candidates, managers and human resources managers must spend some time assessing the candidate’s assumptions and values. Is this person a collaborator or a competitor? Are candidates detail-oriented or innovative? Candidates whose personal assumptions and values match the corporate culture are much more likely to help maintain that culture over time.
Onboarding. The “onboarding” process is really a new employee orientation process. During onboarding, human resources personnel help the new employee get to know company policies and practices. It’s during onboarding, for example, that a new employee may learn that each team puts together a skit for the company holiday party or that bonuses can be earned as a result of exceeding sales goals.
Training. Training can be both formal and informal. Whereas formal training may teach new employees how to use company software or systems, informal training may involve one-on-one conversations with peers and managers. During those conversations, new employees learn how the company culture manifests itself in the workplace. For example, they may learn that everyone—even bad players—take part in departmental softball games, or that recycling is a “must” in the lunchroom. All these subtle bits of information add up to an understanding of corporate culture.
Once an employee is hired, he or she may feel comfortable or uncomfortable in the new workplace. Typically, those employees who feel “at home” in the corporate culture tend to stick around, whereas those who feel like outsiders tend to leave at the first good opportunity.
When you walk into a business setting, you should be able to see visible signs of the business’s organizational culture. If you spend a few weeks on the job, you should see even more. Here are just a few things to look out for:
How employees dress. Most employers have some kind of dress code. Some are quite casual whereas others require more formal clothing. In a minority of businesses there is no dress code at all, and employees are welcome to wear short, sleeveless tops, and even flip-flops to work.
Snack areas and candy jars. How people-oriented is your business? In some workplaces, employees have all-day access to snack bars, free soft drinks, coffee, and other goodies. Candy jars are also a sign that a business is open to people-oriented treats.
Plaques and awards. In some businesses, plaques and awards honoring employees are placed front and center. Some honor individuals as “employee of the month,” whereas others recognize specific achievements such as “most sales made in a month.”
Mission statement. In many corporations, the organizational mission is posted on every floor. The mission is intended to remind employees why they are there and what their goals and attitudes should be.
Events and rituals. Many workplaces have customs or rituals that become obvious within just a couple of weeks on the job. Whether it’s “happy hour Friday,” “dress down Tuesday,” or weekly update meetings, employees quickly learn the routines.
Physical layout and décor. When you walk into a workplace, what do you see? In some offices, gray cubicles dominate; in others, the workspace is wide open. In some businesses, individuals are encouraged to bring in and show off photos, posters, and plants; in others employees are asked to keep personal items to a minimum.
Recognizing the culture is the beginning of adapting to it and, perhaps, using it to persuade management to your ideas.
When times change, corporations may need to change as well. Many factors can make change necessary, ranging from social norms to technology to new ways of doing business. No matter why cultural change is needed, it’s never easy. That’s because human beings, in general, resist change. To make cultural change successful, therefore, companies must create change management strategies and stick to them over time.
Initiating Change
Although there are many ways to initiate change, the most effective methods come from the top down. One of the keys to making change happen is the actions of the corporate leader.
Create a sense of urgency. Why should employees change their habits, systems, or ways of doing business? If there’s no emergency, employees are likely to resist change. But what if your business is likely to fail if you don’t reinvent some of your culture and practices? In 1993, IBM was facing just such a crisis. Lou Gerstner, IBM’s CEO, made it clear to employees that the situation was truly dire: change or die. In a short time, IBM shifted from being an old-fashioned, stuck-in-the-past footnote to a future-facing, innovative organization.
Role modeling. If the need for organizational change is communicated from the top down, it must be modeled from the top down as well. When a corporate leader is truly committed to change, he or she becomes a guiding light for the entire organization. A leader can model change through public actions such as press conferences or presentations. More significant, however, are actions that show that the leader is truly taking his or her own ideas to heart. Not only is it inspiring to see a leader taking his or her own advice to heart, but it’s also helpful to see what the change really looks like. Robert Iger, who became CEO of Disney, was concerned that innovation was fading. To show his commitment to cultural change, he jumped in to provide hands-on help with game creation.
Changing leaders. Once a company has made a commitment to change, it’s important that all members of the senior management team understand and embrace the change. In some cases, individuals may dig in their heels and refuse to change their practices. When this happens, the company has little choice but to terminate their employment.
Managing Change
As is often the reality, it’s easy to start a process—but much more difficult to manage it over time. The following techniques can help ensure that change is institutionalized:
Excellent communication. That’s the key conclusion of a 2016 study, “Where Change Management Fails,” from Robert Half Management Resources. This survey of 300 senior managers found that most change efforts failed in the implementation stage—on shoals of broken or inadequate communication.[1]
Changing leaders who present barriers to change. It’s hard for employees to make change when their own managers are resistant to new ideas. When leadership is standing in the way of positive change, upper management may have to “clean house” by dismissing managers who, for personal or political reasons, are unwilling to bend.
Training programs. When organizational culture is the source of unethical or unsafe practices, training can be the key to change. The same is true for changes related to customer service. The Midas auto repair chain, for example, used training to help employees better empathize with customers’ needs and concerns.
Changing reward systems and corporate symbols. To let employees know things have really changed, it may be necessary to change incentives. For example, if a company has rewarded individual achievement but wants to see a cultural switch to teamwork, it may need to reward team accomplishments. Similarly, the company may need to change the visual symbols it uses to reflect the new organizational culture.
Changing the look and feel of the workplace. A workplace “makeover” can have a profound impact on change. Visual cues can quickly and effectively let employees know that they are encouraged to gather around a large table in a shared work area, or that managers in an open environment are available for questions and collaboration.
Changing a firm’s culture is hard, and many attempts fail. CEOs have lost their jobs because they tried and failed. It generally takes years and may require replacing people. College administrators joke that their ideas for OER (open educational resources, such as this online course) advance slowly, one retirement at a time. But change is possible with the right approach.
What you’ll learn to do: identify the advantages and challenges of employee diversity within organizations
America is an incredibly diverse country, with residents and citizens from virtually every part of the world. Colleges and universities are perhaps even more diverse than communities. Undergraduate and graduate students travel from Asia, Europe, Africa, and South America to study in the United States. American workplaces are also increasingly diverse, particularly when companies work with or have divisions in other countries. There are great benefits to diversity, but differences can also create challenges.
Until the 1950s and 1960s, diversity was not associated with the workplace in the United States. In general, people were hired based on their gender, race, social status, and religion. Women were often asked to leave their jobs if they married or became pregnant. No accommodation was made for disability except by special arrangement.
But there were a few exceptions, particularly in fields in which qualified employees were scarce. The computer industry was one such field.
IBM, one of the most strait-laced companies in the United States, was also one of the most diverse. In 1953, for example, IBM’s president wrote a letter to his managers stating: “It is the policy of this organization to hire people who have the personality, talent and background necessary to fill a given job, regardless of race, color or creed.” Even in the Deep South, where segregation was a reality in restaurants, hotels, and even at water fountains, IBM employees of all races and backgrounds ate together in the cafeteria.
Fast-forward to the twenty-first century, and diversity in the workplace is not just a matter of ethics.  Diversity is required by law and is a recommended strategy. Federal protected classes include race, color, religion or creed, national origin or ancestry, gender, age, disability, veteran status, and, in two cases, genetic information. The law creates a minimum response to discrimination, but diversity is also an asset in running a business.
Many experts, including the Boston Consulting Group, recommend diversity as a long-term strategy. They use a broader meaning of diversity, which adds personality, cognitive style, education, social background, and more. For example, the largest companies make a point of hiring from many colleges. Even if Harvard produced the best individual candidates, companies would still hire from many colleges. The diversity of training and connections are strengths, not shortcomings.
A diverse workplace isn’t always easy to achieve, as some locations, industries, and positions tend to attract people of certain backgrounds. To diversify the workplace, some companies make a significant effort to reach out to diverse communities. For example, they might reach out to the veterans community, which includes thousands of individuals of all backgrounds, many of whom have solid training and experience.
The explosive growth in global trade means that large corporations began sending more Americans abroad, outsourcing work to other countries, and hiring non-American workers to come to the United States. Meanwhile, changing norms and laws improved the status of women in the workplace, and made it both acceptable and legal to be out, gay, and married. Finally, the Americans with Disabilities Act made it necessary for businesses to accommodate individuals with disabilities through the addition of elevators, ramps, Braille signage, flexible work settings and hours, and more.
With so many requirements for diversity, most US businesses now employ a very wide range of people. A diverse workplace brings both challenges and opportunities.
Advantages of Employee Diversity
The Boston Consulting Group, a management consulting firm, takes an approach to diversity that borrows from ecology. First, diversity builds resilience. Enduring systems comprise a broad variety of agents, which behave and respond to external stimuli in varying ways. As a result, a challenge to the system is less likely to break it. Second, diversity is the basis of adaptiveness. Diversity of problem-solving heuristics and behavior permits a system to evolve and learn from experience. Internal variety—diversity—provides the grist for the system to test ideas and actions and select the most effective in each environment.[1]
When a workplace employs only people of similar background, education, and lifestyle, it’s easy for employees to reinforce one another’s preconceptions and prejudices. When people of different cultures and backgrounds are valued and heard, however, new ideas and opportunities emerge. The Peterson Institute for International Economics studied the impact of female executives in ninety-one countries and almost twenty-two thousand firms. The firms with more women in corporate leadership did better.[2] A study of this kind cannot determine cause and effect. For example, better performance may result from the nondiscrimination policies and a more open culture, but diversity is a winning strategy either way. Here are some ways that diversity can positively impact an organization:
Diversity enhances creativity. People from different places, ethnicities, and lifestyles can bring fresh ideas to an older corporation. Could a product be made to appeal to a whole new demographic? How might a particular service be advertised to a new ethnic market or the disabled community? By including people of different backgrounds in the conversation, managers get valuable insights into different points of view.
Diversity enhances image. Today’s marketplace is diverse; so, too, are customers. When a company can present itself as diverse, clients and buyers respond positively.
Diversity improves outreach. Employees from different parts of the world or different communities can help a corporation to understand and reach out to new markets.
Diversity improves morale. When employees of all backgrounds and abilities feel valued, they are more likely to be loyal, engaged, and productive. Employees are also more likely to feel a sense of pride and belonging when they are associated with an employer that clearly cares about the well-being of all.
Challenges of Employee Diversity
Differences fuel battles and even wars. That’s true in the political arena, and it can also be true in the workplace. Problems that can arise with a diverse workplace include difficulty with communication, different work styles or work ethics. Small issues, such as different smells in the lunchroom, can quickly escalate if not managed appropriately.
Differences in culture can also lead to miscommunication. For example, Americans value eye contact—even with members of the opposite sex. But in many Asian and Middle Eastern countries, direct eye contact is considered to be disrespectful. Direct eye contact with someone of the opposite sex may even be seen as flirting. It’s very important, therefore, to provide diversity training to avoid serious social gaffes and challenges.
Work styles can also vary from culture to culture. Although many Asians and Central Americans work in groups and value consensus, most Germans and Americans prefer to work independently. Some cultures place a high value on order, organization, and method whereas others emphasize spontaneity and flexible thinking.
Another serious challenge lies in diversity in management. Typically, top leadership is white and male whereas lower level workers may be female or nonwhite. To be seriously considered for promotion to a top-level management position in many US companies, individuals must assimilate to the point where they are virtually indistinguishable from existing leadership. This, of course, negates the advantages of diversity—and raises the bar for promotion.
Fortunately, many of the challenges of employee diversity can be foreseen and managed through employee training and diversity-oriented company policies. It’s important, however, for management to think ahead rather than assume that a diverse workforce will work well without any intervention.
Think back to the beginning of this module and the quote from Tony Hsieh that “If you get the culture right, most of the other stuff will just take care of itself.” Given what you’ve learned in this module, do you agree with him? Consider also this quote from legendary management consultant Peter Drucker that “Culture eats strategy for breakfast.” This module has equipped you to evaluate these statements and understand why exceptional leaders consider culture to be central to organizational success.
Let’s consider the example of Zappos in greater detail. Based on experiences earlier in his career, CEO Tony Hsieh became committed to the idea that culture matters most in an organization. So how does that manifest itself in Zappos?
One of the topics covered in this module was how to integrate culture into the recruiting and hiring processes. This is very important at Zappos. In the early days of the organization, Hsieh or another key executive would participate in every interview. If they didn’t feel the candidate was a good culture fit, they would look for someone else. It didn’t matter how talented the candidate was—if the culture fit was wrong, they wouldn’t make the hire. As the company grew, Hsieh knew that the leaders he had hired would follow his example. As a result, culture fit remains the primary focus in both recruiting and hiring. This has resulted in a team that is focused on the same values and wants to achieve the same goals.

This laser focus on culture has proven to be a tremendous competitive advantage for Zappos. The entire organization shares the same core value—please the customer! As an example of this focus, Zappos telephone customer service representatives (CSRs) are not measured on average call time, which is a standard in the industry. Zappos doesn’t worry about how long a CSR is on the call with a customer. One caller took 10.5 hours, and Zappos praised the CSR.[1]
Instead, what managers care about is how the customer feels when the call is over. Was their issue resolved? Were they happy with the overall experience? Zappos wants its CSRs to spend as much time as necessary to make customers happy. This is a radically different approach than most organizations, and it results from the organization’s culture.
As a testament to the success of its focus on culture, more than 75 percent of sales at Zappos are from repeat customers. This is an amazing statistic, much higher than the industry average of 48 percent.[2] Focusing on creating and maintaining the right culture will help you be successful as a manager and give your organization a unique competitive advantage.


Dana is a recent graduate who was selected to be part of ABC Corporation’s management training program. She has her master’s degree in engineering and wants to become a project manager in the company’s research and development division. She receives her training schedule and syllabus and notices that a large portion of the program is devoted to understanding income statements, balance sheets, and cash flow statements. Given that she has no desire to ever work in finance, Dana questions the need to focus so much on financial management.
Why do you think that Dana’s program contains such a high degree of focus on financial concepts? In fact, many of the most highly regarded corporate training programs have a similar focus.
Thinking back to the P-O-L-C framework that we’ve used throughout this course, you’ll remember that the C stands for control. One of the key functions of a manager is to ensure that all parts of the organization are working to achieve the overall strategic objectives of the company. Properly designed and implemented controls are the method by which managers carry out this responsibility.
In this module you will learn about business control processes and other tools that are extremely important for managerial success. Become familiar with these various tools—they will serve you well in the future.

What you’ll learn to do: explain what control means in a business setting and why it is needed
Control can mean a lot of things to different people. In a business setting, it means guiding the activities, employees, and processes of an organization to reach goals, prevent errors, and abide by the law. There are various styles, types, and levels of organizational control. A good manager applies the best combination of these elements, based on the needs and culture of the company, to successfully run the organization.

Control in general is a device or mechanism used to regulate or guide the operation of a machine, apparatus, or system. Control in a business setting, or organizational control, involves the processes and procedures that regulate, guide, and protect an organization. It is one of the four primary managerial functions, along with planning, organizing, and leading.
One common type of control companies use is a set of financial policies. These policies may not be communicated to all employees, but they exist for all but the smallest firms. Controls start with managing cash. For example, controls limit check-writing authority and the use of company credit cards. For example, a firm may require two signatures on checks more than $10,000 or have one person to log journal entries and another person to review the entries. These policies help prevent fraud and errors as well as monitor whether company goals are being met. In larger companies, each department manager submits an annual budget and profit-and-loss statements.
The most common style, or approach, of organizational control is top-down control. With top-down control, decisions are made by high-level executives, and information flows down to the lower-level employees of the organization.
The three types of organizational control include the familiar feedback, proactive, and concurrent controls. We’ll talk about these more later, but first, let’s explore some of the benefits and disadvantages of organizational control.
Implementing Organizational Control
Organizational control involves developing rules, procedures, or other protocols for directing the work of employees and processes as well as monitoring the work. Organizational control is an important function because it helps identify errors and deviation from standards so that corrective actions can be taken to achieve goals. The purpose of organizational control is to ensure that a specific function is performed according to established standards.
Benefits
Organizational control has many varied benefits, including improved communication, financial stability, increased productivity and efficiency, help in meeting annual goals, improved morale, legal compliance, improved quality control, and fraud and error prevention.
Controls help to better define an organization’s objectives so that employees and resources are focused on them. They safeguard against misuse of resources and facilitate corrective measures. Having good records means management will better understand what happened in the past and where change can be effective.
All businesses need controls. Even sole proprietor businesses must keep records for tax reporting. Public companies are legally required to have extensive controls to protect stockholders, and good controls help a company to raise funds through stock and debt issuance.
Employee morale may be higher when workers see that management is paying attention and knows what it is doing. As an earlier module discussed, better morale means better productivity. Better controls can mean more freedom and responsibility for employees. Management is able to step back a little, knowing that the controls will flag any exceptions.
Toyota has made control a competitive advantage. As an article in the Harvard Business Review says, “Toyota’s way is to measure everything—even the noise that car doors make when they open and close as workers perform their final inspections on newly manufactured automobiles.”[1]After bad publicity over unusual brake issues, Toyota was again at the top of Consumer Reports’ 2016 reliability report.[2]
Disadvantages
Even the simplest control is an added expense. Some systems can be very expensive, so management must weigh the cost versus the benefit for each control. Banks spend billions on controls, but it is worthwhile for the large banks, because they handle trillions and their profits are still in the billions.
A control mentality can lead to overstaffing and unsustainable costs for some businesses. Community banks, for example, feel the burden of new regulations on the banking industry more heavily than the largest nationwide banks. Research from the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minnesota, and quoted in the New York Times “suggests that adding just two members to the compliance department would make a third of the smallest banks unprofitable.”[3]
A less obvious expense is maintaining the controls. Systems need continuous updating as the organization changes. If they are not maintained, the controls may become ineffective.
Controls can become a blind spot for management. Overreliance on controls may lead to relaxation in supervision and allow manipulation of accounts and assets. Employees tend to follow the letter of rules, not the intent, so management needs to check in regularly on how controls are actually operating.
A rigid implementation may lead to a slowdown in the operation of the business. At Freddie Mac, a financial services company, the new product approval process required 25 signatures and took more than a year. The new opportunities in the market disappeared before products could be approved.
The wrong controls may expose the firm to more errors and fraud. And employees will be frustrated if the controls are cumbersome.
What you’ll learn to do: explain the basic control process and monitoring points
Controlling activities and behaviors is a dynamic process, a cycle of repeated corrections. The steps in the control process will be repeated in the course of production activities. The categories of control, based on the perspective of time, include feedback, concurrent, and proactive controls. These use past and present information or future projections to improve an activity. Managers use all of these controls to manage their business.

The proper performance of the management control function is critical to the success of an organization. After plans are set in place, management must execute a series of steps to ensure that the plans are carried out. The steps in the basic control process can be followed for almost any application, such as improving product quality, reducing waste, and increasing sales. The basic control process includes the following steps:
Setting performance standards: Managers must translate plans into performance standards. These performance standards can be in the form of goals, such as revenue from sales over a period of time. The standards should be attainable, measurable, and clear.
Measuring actual performance: If performance is not measured, it cannot be ascertained whether standards have been met.
Comparing actual performance with standards or goals: Accept or reject the product or outcome.
Analyzing deviations: Managers must determine why standards were not met. This step also involves determining whether more control is necessary or if the standard should be changed.
Taking corrective action: After the reasons for deviations have been determined, managers can then develop solutions for issues with meeting the standards and make changes to processes or behaviors.
Consider a situation in which a fictional company, The XYZ Group, has suffered a decrease in the profits from its high-end sunglasses due to employee theft. Senior executives establish a plan to eliminate the occurrence of employee theft. It has been determined that the items are being stolen from the company warehouse. The executives establish a goal of zero thefts ($0) within a three-month period (Step 1). The company currently loses an average of $1,000 per month due to employee theft.
To discourage the undesired behavior, XYZ installed cameras in the warehouse and placed locks on the cabinets where the most expensive sunglasses are stored. Only the warehouse managers have keys to these cabinets.
After three months, XYZ managers contact the bookkeeper to get the sales and inventory figures for the past three-month period (Step 2). The managers then compare the figures with the previous period, taking into account orders for deliveries, returns, and defective merchandise (Step 3). It has been determined that the company lost $200 the first month, $300 the second month, and $200 the third month due to theft, which is an improvement but short of the goal. Managers then come up with suggestions for making adjustments to the control system (Step 4).
XYZ senior executives approve of the suggestion to institute a zero-tolerance policy for employee theft. Now, if there is evidence that an employee has stolen a pair of sunglasses, that employee’s job will be terminated. The employee handbook is updated to include the change, and XYZ executives hold a meeting with all warehouse employees to communicate the policy change (Step 5).
Timing of Controls
Controls can be categorized according to the time in which a process or activity occurs. The controls related to time include feedback, proactive, and concurrent controls. Feedback control concerns the past. Proactive control anticipates future implications. Concurrent control concerns the present.
Feedback
Feedback occurs after an activity or process is completed. It is reactive. For example, feedback control would involve evaluating a team’s progress by comparing the production standard to the actual production output. If the standard or goal is met, production continues. If not, adjustments can be made to the process or to the standard.
An example of feedback control is when a sales goal is set, the sales team works to reach that goal for three months, and at the end of the three-month period, managers review the results and determine whether the sales goal was achieved. As part of the process, managers may also implement changes if the goal is not achieved. Three months after the changes are implemented, managers will review the new results to see whether the goal was achieved.
The disadvantage of feedback control is that modifications can be made only after a process has already been completed or an action has taken place. A situation may have ended before managers are aware of any issues. Therefore, feedback control is more suited for processes, behaviors, or events that are repeated over time, rather than those that are not repeated.
Proactive control
Proactive control, also known as preliminary, preventive, or feed-forward control, involves anticipating trouble, rather than waiting for a poor outcome and reacting afterward. It is about prevention or intervention. An example of proactive control is when an engineer performs tests on the braking system of a prototype vehicle before the vehicle design is moved on to be mass produced.
Proactive control looks forward to problems that could reasonably occur and devises methods to prevent the problems. It cannot control unforeseen and unlikely incidents, such as “acts of God.”
Concurrent control
With concurrent control, monitoring takes place during the process or activity. Concurrent control may be based on standards, rules, codes, and policies.
One example of concurrent control is fleet tracking. Fleet tracking by GPS allows managers to monitor company vehicles. Managers can determine when vehicles reach their destinations and the speed in which they move between destinations. Managers are able to plan more efficient routes and alert drivers to change routes to avoid heavy traffic. It also discourages employees from running personal errands during work hours.
In another example, Keen Media tries to reduce employee inefficiency by monitoring Internet activity. In accordance with company policy, employees keep a digital record of their activities during the workday. IT staff can also access employee computers to determine how much time is being spent on the Internet to conduct personal business and “surf the Web.”
Introduction to Levels and Types of Control
What you’ll learn to do: describe the different levels and types of control
In management, there are varying levels of control: strategic (highest level), operational (mid-level), and tactical (low level). Imagine the president of a company decides to build a new company headquarters. He enlists the help of the company’s officers to decide on the location, style of architecture, size, etc. (strategic control). The project manager helps develop the project schedule and budget (operational control). The general contractor directs workers, orders materials and equipment for delivery, and establishes rules to ensure site safety (tactical control).
Control can be objective or normative. Objective control involves elements of the company that can be objectively measured, such as call volume, profitability, and inventory efficiency. Normative control means employees learn the values and beliefs of a company and know what’s right from observing other employees.

Managers want to know if the company is headed in the right direction and if current company trends and changes are keeping them on that right path. To answer this question requires the implementation of strategic control. Strategic control involves monitoring a strategy as it is being implemented, evaluating deviations, and making necessary adjustments.

Strategic control may involve the reassessment of a strategy due to an immediate, unforeseen event. For example, if a company’s main product is becoming obsolete, the company must immediately reassess its strategy.
Implementing a strategy often involves a series of activities that occur over a period. Managers can effectively monitor the progress of a strategy at various milestones, or intervals, during the period. During this time, managers may be provided information that helps them determine whether the overall strategy is unfolding as planned.
Strategic control also involves monitoring internal and external events. Multiple sources of information are needed to monitor events. These sources include conversations with customers, articles in trade magazines and journals, activity at trade conferences, and observations of your own or another company’s operations. For example, Toyota gives tours of its plants and shares the “Toyota Way” even with competitors.
The errors associated with strategic control are usually major, such as failing to anticipate customers’ reaction to a competitor’s new product. BlackBerry had a strong position in the business cell phone market and did not quickly see that its business customers were switching to the iPhone. BlackBerry could not recover.
Operational Control
Operational control involves control over intermediate-term operations and processes but not business strategies. Operational control systems ensure that activities are consistent with established plans. Mid-level management uses operational controls for intermediate-term decisions, typically over one to two years. When performance does not meet standards, managers enforce corrective actions, which may include training, discipline, motivation, or termination.
Unlike strategic control, operational control focuses more on internal sources of information and affects smaller units or aspects of the organization, such as production levels or the choice of equipment. Errors in operational control might mean failing to complete projects on time. For example, if salespeople are not trained on time, sales revenue may fall.
Tactical Control
A tactic is a method that meets a specific objective of an overall plan. Tactical control emphasizes the current operations of an organization. Managers determine what the various parts of the organization must do for the organization to be successful in the near future (one year or less).
For example, a marketing strategy for a wholesale bakery might be an e-commerce solution for targeted customers, such as restaurants. Tactical control may involve regularly meeting with the marketing team to review results and would involve creating the steps needed to complete agreed-upon processes. Tactics for the bakery strategy may include the following:
building a list of local restaurants, hotels, and grocery stores
outlining how the bakery website can be used to receive orders
personally visiting local executive chefs for follow-up
monitoring the response to determine whether the sales target is met
Strategic control always comes first, followed by operations, and then tactics. For example, a strategy to be environmentally responsible could lead to an operations decision to seek Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certification. This is a program that awards points toward certification for initiatives in energy efficiency, such as installing timed thermostats, using occupant sensors to control lighting use, and using green cleaning products. The tactical decision is deciding which energy-efficient equipment to purchase. At each level, controls ask if the decisions serve the purpose: actual energy savings, the LEED certification, and acting responsibly for the environment.
Top-down controls are also known as bureaucratic controls. Top-down control means the use of rules, regulations, and formal authority to guide performance. It includes things such as budgets, statistical reports, and performance appraisals to regulate behavior and results. Top-down control is the most common process, where senior executives make decisions and establish policies and procedures that implement the decisions. Lower-level managers may make recommendations for their departments, but they follow the lead of senior managers.
Advantages
With top-down control, employees can spend their time performing their job duties instead of discussing the direction of the company and offering input into the development of new policies. Senior executives save time by not explaining why some ideas are used and not others. Heavily regulated businesses may find this approach to be most beneficial.
Disadvantages
The top-down approach has its drawbacks. The lower levels of a company are in touch with customers and recognize new trends or new competition earlier than senior management. A heavy-handed top-down approach may discourage employees from sharing information or ideas up the chain of command.
Objective and Normative Control
Objective control is based on facts that can be measured and tested. Rather than create a rule that may be ambiguous, objective controls measure observable behavior or output. As an example of a behavioral control, let’s say that a store wants employees to be friendly to customers. It could make that a rule as stated, but it may not be clear what that means and is not measurable. To make that goal into an objective control, it might specify, “Smile and greet anyone within 10 feet. Answer customer questions.”
Output control is another form of objective control. Some companies, such as Yahoo, have relaxed rules about work hours and focus on output. Because programmers’ output can be measured, this has worked well, whether an employee works the traditional 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. or starts at noon and works until 8 p.m.
Normative controls govern behavior through accepted patterns of action rather than written policies and procedures. Normative control uses values and beliefs called norms, which are established standards. For example, within a team, informal rules make team members aware of their responsibilities. The ways in which team members interact are developed over time. Team members come to an informal agreement as to how responsibilities will be divided, often based on the perceived strengths of each team member. These unwritten rules are normative controls and can powerfully influence behavior.
Normative control reflects the organization’s culture, the shared values among the members of the organization. Every organization has norms of behavior that workers need to learn. One company may expect employees to take the initiative to solve problems. Another may require a manager’s approval before employees discuss changes outside the department. Some topics may be off-base, while others are freely discussed. Companies will have a mix of controls—top-down, objective, and normative.
What you’ll learn to do: explain the need for a balanced scorecard
Just as humans have different systems that interact to make up a person’s overall health, organizations have many different components that contribute to organizational health. Though we tend to focus on symptoms to know whether we’re healthy or not, it’s a good idea to have regular physical exams to make sure we’re not missing any health red flags. In the case of an organization, this is where a balanced scorecard comes in. A balanced scorecard is the health checklist, monitoring and measuring the health of the company.
A balanced scorecard is a strategic planning and performance management concept developed by Dr. Robert Kaplan and Dr. David Norton, published in a Harvard Business Review article titled “The Balanced Scorecard—Measures That Drive Performance”. What differentiates the balanced scorecard concept is the inclusion of non-financial operational data in addition to the customary financial metrics. In introducing their balanced scorecard concept, Kaplan and Norton sought to identify measures that give managers a “fast but comprehensive” view of the business. As they put it: “The balanced scorecard includes financial measures that tell the results of actions already taken. And it complements the financial measures with operational measures on customer satisfaction, internal processes, and the organization’s innovation and improvement activities—operational measures that are the drivers of future financial performance.” The authors suggest thinking of the balanced scorecard as the dials and indicators in an airplane cockpit, noting that in business, as in flying, reliance on only one instrument can be fatal.
Dr. Kaplan’s findings reveal that a scorecard is highly effective with regards to indoctrinating employees with the firm’s mission and objectives. That is, the results of a scorecard is a framework that ensures that employees know what they are trying to accomplish rather than simply fixating on what it is they do. This is particularly important since, as discussed previously, the actual operating environment generally requires adaptability and a clear understanding of “success.”

Bain & Company, a global consulting firm, ranks the balanced scorecard fifth of the top 10 management tools used around the world. The Gartner Group has found that more than 50 percent of large US firms use a balanced scorecard (BSC). Moreover, many large firms all over the world use the balanced scorecard in business operations.[1]
Balanced Scorecard Components
The balanced scorecard analyzes a business from four perspectives—customer, internal business processes, innovation and learning and financial. To develop these perspectives, management asks four key questions:
Customer Perspective: How do customers see us?
Internal Business Perspective: What must we excel at?
Innovation and Learning Perspective: [How] can we continue to improve and create value?
Financial Perspective: How do we look to shareholders?
To implement a balanced scorecard, organizations articulate goals for each perspective and translate them into specific measures. Note, however, that this is not done in the abstract. Adoption of a balanced scorecard approach to strategic and performance management starts with an analysis of an organization’s current internal and external environments. This analysis is conducted with reference to the organization’s mission, vision and values and other strategic planning elements. Thus, a BSC is the plan at the executional level that supports achievement of an organization’s mission. Let’s drill down into the four perspectives.
Customer Perspective
In order to remain viable businesses, organizations need to deliver value to their customers. Indeed, a recent Knowledge@Wharton article noted that “customer experience is now Job #1 for CEOs.” To elaborate: “Job No. 1 for CEOs today is ensuring the company delivers a compelling customer experience.”
To develop the customer perspective component of a BSC, managers must translate their general statement of commitment—i.e., Ford’s Quality is Job 1—into specific measures that reflect what matters to their customers. According to Kaplan and Norton “customers’ concerns tend to fall into four categories: time, quality, performance and service, and cost.” Measures of time might be the elapsed time between placing and delivery of an order. For new products, time might be the number of weeks or months it takes to go from concept to market availability. Measures of quality include the number of defects as judged by the customer.
To develop this view, Kaplan and Norton recommend a combination of internal and external research. For example, a company would have the data required to measure a goal of reducing delivery time. However, to evaluate competitive standing or market perception of quality or performance requires a company to survey customers. It’s worth noting that customers often define factors such as “on time delivery” differently. Compiling the data for major customers will allow the organization to make a determination on what the target should be.
Internal Business Perspective
As stated above, the prompt to identify a company’s internal business goals is “what must we excel at?” That is, what does the company need to do in order to meet customer and stakeholder (financial) expectations? This view focuses on internal processes, human resource capabilities and productivity and product and service quality. In detailing this component, Kaplan and Norton advise managers to identify and leverage the company’s core competencies and to focus on processes and competencies that differentiate the company from its competitors.
Examples of internal business measures include product, service or functional efficiency or expertise. Think Nordstrom’s for service, Apple for design capabilities and Proctor & Gamble’s marketing and distribution expertise.
To achieve internal business measures, managers must ensure that the goals are clearly communicated and understood by the employees who are responsible for the processes, projects or initiatives. The importance of communication—of employees internalizing and focusing on specific goals—is the point that the CEO’s Dr. Kaplan spoke to emphasize in the video above. Effective operational information systems—collecting and reporting relevant data—are critical to be able to identify and trouble-shoot variances from target in this view. The best case scenario is for scorecard information to be reported in a timely manner (based on organizational dynamics) and for the measure to be linked to relevant manager and employee evaluations.
Innovation and Learning Perspective
The Customer and Internal Processes perspectives discussed above identify what an organization needs to accomplish from a competitive standpoint based on the current situation. However, the larger operating environment is dynamic and businesses need to continuously adapt or risk obsolescence.
The innovation and learning perspective (also referred to as learning and growth or organizational capacity) is the future view, seeking to answer the question “How can we continue to improve and create value?” According to Kaplan and Norton, “A company’s ability to innovate, improve, and learn ties directly to the company’s value. That is, only through the ability to launch new products, create more value for customers, and improve operating efficiencies continually can a company penetrate new markets and increase revenues and margins—in short, grow and thereby increase shareholder value.”
Measures for this category include the percent of sales from new products (innovation) and continuous improvement of internal business processes. An example of the latter is industrial manufacturing company Milliken & Co.’s “ten-four” continuous improvement program, a challenge to reduce quality issues—process issues, product defects, late deliveries and waste—by a factor of ten over the next four years.
Financial Perspective
The financial perspective is the classic numbers—some would say the “bottom line” view. Ultimately, this view shows whether the company’s strategy and execution are successful. Typical financial goals include profit, operating costs, target market revenue and sales growth. Kaplan and Norton cite a company that stated its financial goals in terms we can all understand: to survive, measured by cash flow, to succeed, measured by quarterly sales growth, and to prosper, measured by an increase in market share and return on equity. The authors note that although there is significant criticism of financial measures due to their focus on past performance and inability to account for value-creating initiatives, “the hard truth is that if improved performance fails to be reflected in the bottom line, executives should reexamine the basic assumptions of their strategy and mission.”
The authors conclude with a caveat: a balanced scorecard—specifically, the measures of customer satisfaction, internal business performance, and innovation and improvement—are based on a specific company’s interpretation of their business and operating environment. However, that view may not be accurate.
To quote: “An excellent set of balanced scorecard measures does not guarantee a winning strategy. The balanced scorecard can only translate a company’s strategy into specific measurable objectives. A failure to convert improved operational performance, as measured in the scorecard, into improved financial performance should send executives back to their drawing boards to rethink the company’s strategy or its implementation.”
Why a BSC Is Needed
Fannie Mae is a financial services company. Before 1992, Fannie Mae’s compensation structure was linked to a wide range of performance measures. Beginning in 1992, earnings-per-share growth and growth were the only measures used to set incentive pay for Fannie executives. The incentive pay handed to Fannie executives more than quadrupled after this change, rising from $8.5 million to $35.2 million (1993 to 2000). In 2003, the regulator overseeing Fannie Mae found accounting fraud.
Without a balanced scorecard, executives focus on only one or a few aspects of the organization. A company may be doing well financially but performing poorly in another area. Even if a company is doing extremely well in one area and outperforming the competition, the area that needs the most improvement may destroy the company. For example, a company may exceed customer expectations related to product quality, corporate social responsibility, and customer service; however, its gross profit margin could be low. With a low gross profit margin, the company may not be able to grow, compete, or overcome obstacles.
A BSC forces managers to look at the company as a whole to measure performance and thus more accurately determine the company’s overall state. Managers can then work to improve in areas in which it is lacking.
Companies need both financial and nonfinancial controls to achieve goals, remain competitive in industry, and be successful. Financial controls include budgets and various financial ratios. These evaluate the performance of an organization. One important nonfinancial control is quality management.

The standard financial reports are the statement of cash flows, the balance sheet, the income statement, financial ratios, and budgets. For most large companies, the first three are required by law. Stockholders need to know how their company is doing. Financial ratios help in investing decisions and in managing the company. They are common but not legally required. Budgets are internal plans, which the company does not typically disclose.
A budget sets a limit on spending and thus is a method of control used to help organizations achieve goals. The budget may be single number setting a manager’s spending limit or a plan with limits for detailed items. Departments and the whole organization will develop budgets both for planning and control.
To follow a budget requires discipline. When an expense or desirable pops up, managers must prioritize purchases to stay within budget. In this sense, budgets help control spending and ensure that goals are reached by allocating money to the places where it is needed. Without this planned allocation of resources, there is the risk of spending too much money in one or a few areas, thereby not having enough for other areas.
Budgets can also be used to delegate authority. When an executive assigns a task to a subordinate, the executive needs to release the funds in order for the employee to complete the task. In releasing the funds with an assigned budget, the executive delegates the authority to make decisions regarding the proper use of the funds. The executive can use the budget as a means of monitoring and measuring the performance of the subordinate. With this means of control, the executive may feel comfortable with delegating authority.
Financial Ratios
When people think of management, they often visualize a person giving orders, hiring employees, checking the work of employees, establishing policies, and administering discipline. However, watching the numbers is also an important activity in management. The numbers can be converted to financial ratios, which allow easy comparisons.
Managers use ratios to analyze elements such as debt, equity, efficiency, and activity. For example, a debt ratio compares an organization’s debt to its assets. It is calculated as total liabilities divided by total assets. The higher the ratio, the more leveraged the company is. If a company has a high debt ratio (relative to its industry), the company has to spend a significant portion of its cash flow on bills.
The key to understanding ratios is comparing them to relevant benchmarks. The debt ratio for a manufacturing company might typically be 50 percent, meaning debt funds half of the assets. In a bank the typical debt ratio is around 92 percent. The relevant benchmark for a bank is the banking industry average or another bank, not a manufacturer.
Analyzing financial ratios can help managers determine the financial health of the company. Knowing the state of the company in various areas (e.g., inventory, equity, and debt) allows managers to make the changes needed to course-correct and to reach goals.
Quality Management
Have you ever bought a product that was defective? Have you ever been served by a company representative in such a way that it made you want to tell people what a great company it is or give the company five-star ratings on social media? In both cases, quality management was behind the scenes of your customer experience.
Quality management involves controlling, monitoring, and modifying tasks to maintain a desired level of quality or excellence. At the core of quality management is customer satisfaction. Companies pursue the level of quality for their products and services that customers expect and desire. Managers strive to know what customers want, and they manage operations in such a way as to fulfill those desires. Total Quality Management (TQM) and Six Sigma are well-known programs for managing quality.
Benefits
Quality management helps companies please their customers. When customers are pleased, a company can thrive. A simple example of quality management is part inspection. When a part comes down the production line and is complete, an inspector, or quality-assurance technician, checks and tests the part to ensure that it meets quality standards. If it does not, the part is discarded. Thus, quality management helps to ensure that customers are not disappointed so that a company can maintain a good reputation, gain a competitive edge, and ultimately make a profit.
By reducing defects, companies save both time and money. There are fewer returns from customers, and customers are more loyal, reducing the need and cost of acquiring new customers. By catching mistakes early, the production process is not tied up with damaged materials. The final output of acceptable goods increases.
The Systems Sciences Institute at IBM has reported that the cost to fix an error found during beta testing was 15 times as much as one uncovered during design. If the same error was released, the cost to fix the error was up to 100 times more during the maintenance period.[1]
Costs
Regulations are a type of control that society puts on companies. For some large banks, the cost of complying with regulations averages about $12 billion per year.[2] That is a hefty control cost until you consider the cost of control failure. Financial losses in the Great Recession were $10 trillion to $12 trillion![3]
A focus on customers often drives managers to great lengths to please customers. In doing so, quality management can become expensive. Typically, companies need to purchase new software and equipment, hire and train employees, conduct studies, and consult with experts to improve the quality of its products and services. These activities add to the cost of doing business. Management must weigh the costs and benefits.
Do you remember Dana from the opening of the module? She is being trained in management with the ultimate goal of becoming a project manager in her company’s research and development program. A significant portion of her training is going to be in the area of financial control, and she was questioning the need for it. Having completed this module, how would you answer her concerns? Why will she need financial training as a manager of a nonfinancial area?
Financial controls are usually the first and most important controls in any business. Using these is a fundamental skill that every manager needs. Thinking back to the P-O-L-C framework, a management team can plan, organize, and lead, but if there aren’t adequate controls in place, the organization can still fail to achieve its mission.
This is why every successful organization implements controls. Let’s reflect how this might look for Dana at ABC Corporation. The company’s senior leadership will come together to plan the overall strategic goals to be achieved. These will be communicated to the various business groups who will plan their objectives to align with the overarching goals.
As part of this business planning process, each group will begin to develop budgets that will support and fund these goals. These financial plans, when developed and approved, are a tool for measuring performance. If individual projects begin to exceed their revenue or cost targets, management can begin to assess what needs to happen. The financial projections become a powerful benchmark to ensure that things are moving along as planned—to control the business.
One would be hard-pressed to overstate the importance of the control function. If a manager is to be successful, he/she must spend time becoming comfortable with the concepts covered in this module.


